### Welcome to Module 3

We now come to the third and final part of our course. Our last module is in two parts. The first covers some practical matters we need to be aware of when analyzing remote sensing images with classification techniques. One relates to how we cope with the number of recorded bands, especially when that number is large. We also look at the very important topic of how to assess errors in the thematic maps generated by a classification exercise. We then look at methodologies for the application of classification methods to generate thematic maps, noting particularly the benefits of mixing techniques such as unsupervised and supervised learning. The second part of the module is a coverage of image in radar as a remote sensing tool. Radar is one of the key imaging technologies along with visible and infrared imaging that is most commonly encountered. That material introduces some of the innovative aspects of radar, such as its ability to produce topographic maps, monitor changes in topography with time, and the prospect of resolving detail within vertical features such as forests. The module and indeed the whole course concludes with a brief look at what is possible in landscape analysis if different imaging modalities such as radar, optical, and thermal imaging are used together. So at the end of this module, you should understand the need for feature reduction, feature selection as one feature reduction tool. How we go about hyperspectral analysis by library searching the very important topic of classifier performance and map accuracy. How we sample format accuracy assessment, classification methodologies, the fundamentals of imaging radar, then radar interferometry and radar tomography, finalizing with the concept of information fusion. 