---
title: Module 3 Lecture 22 - Radar interferometry for detecting change
teaching: 
exercises: 
questions:
- "???"
objectives:
- "= = ="
keypoints:
- "- - -"
---

### Module 3 Lecture 22: Radar interferometry for detecting change

Having looked at topographic mapping with SAR, we now explore issues for detecting topagraphic change. Suppose we now have two radars, one following the other in the same orbit or even as subsequent orbits of the same platform. And that they image the same region of terrain at times 1 and 2 as indicated in the figure. Imagine that between those two times, there has been a shift in topographic feature in the range direction as shown. That will show up as a shift in slant range as indicated. A two-way interferometric difference in phase will occur between the two acquisitions given by the formula shown here. It depends only on the change in slant range as a fraction of wavelength. For ERS-1 for which the wavelength is 5.6 centimeters, a change in phase shifter 180 degrees corresponds to a change in slant range of just 14 millimeters. At 23 degrees incidents, that corresponds to a lateral shift in the range direction of 5.5 millimeters. That is an amazing degree of sensitivity to change. Ideally, there should be no horizontal separation of the two radars in along track interferometry. If that is acheived, then from the work of our previous lecture, there can be no phase difference between the two returning signals resulting from unchanging terrain relief. In practice though, there will often be a horizontal baseline as well as a time separation which we call a temporal baseline. That means that the phase difference we're looking for associated with topographic variations between the two times can be obscured by the phase difference resulting from static topography. That latter has to be removed. Removal of the phase difference associated with static topography can be done if a digital terrain model is available for the region. That model can be used to synthesize pixel by pixel the topographic interferometric phase. That can then be subtracted from the total phase difference on reception, leaving only the phase difference resolving from topographic movement. An alternative technique is to have three radar acquisitions, two of which are used to create an interferogram from the static topography, that is a DEM. Again, that is used to remove the effect of topography in the phase difference of two other acquisitions. This latter technology goes by the name of digital interferometric SAR or DinSAR. This slide shows three common methods for achieving the temporal baseline needed for a long track interferometry. One involves two antennas on the same platform. Another entails using two passes of the same platform. And the third uses two platforms in the same orbit, one following the other's and so called TanDem operation. This is an early example of change detection using along track interferometry. It's based on two acquisitions of the ERS-1 satellite. Note the amazing sensitivity to the subsidence of Bologna. This is a second example in this case generated from the Japanese ALOS-2 satellites inbound SAR. It is the data of the 2019 California earthquake, again note the enormous sensitivity to small changes in the land form. And as a final example, we returned to the Mount Etna illustration. Now an acquisition by the TanDem-X satelite has been used with a topographic map produced previously with the Shuttle Radar Topography Mission, SRTM. To produce a map of lava flows from an 8th of April 2010 eruption of Mount Etna. The SRTM used interferometric SAR to produce global scale topagraphic maps. The SRTM DEM was acquired in February 2000 and the TanDem-X acquisition was in October 2010. The SRTM data was used to remove phase variations due to static topography. Allowing the phase changes associated with topographic change to be obtained from the TanDem-X mission. The left hand image here shows differential phase variations associated with topographic change. Then the largest phase variations are those associated with lava flow. On the right-hand image, the lava flow detected by a long track SAR interferometry has been overlaid on the topographic model generated by crosstrack SAR interferometry. This is a great example of why SAR imaging is such an important and useful technology. Nothing like this can be so easily achieved with optical imaging. Summarizing this lecture, we have first that topographic changes can be detected using a long track interferometry or ATI. ATI can be acheived by mounting two radars on a single platform such as an aircraft by using repeat passes of the same platform usually spacecraft or by flying platforms in TanDem. When using temporal phase difference, should it take topographic change the phase difference between acquisitions resulting from any horizontal baseline must be removed? ATI is very sensitive to small changes in topography with time. And finally, the website shown here gives some good recent examples of SAR interferometry. The last two questions here are two aspects of the same effect.

> ## Quiz
>
> 1. ?
>
> > ## Solution
> >
> > 1. 
>    {: .solution}
 {: .challenge}

{% include links.md %}
