---
title: Module 3 Lecture 20 - Geometric distortions in radar imagery, cont
teaching: 
exercises: 
questions:
- "???"
objectives:
- "= = ="
keypoints:
- "- - -"
---

### Module 3 Lecture 20: Geometric distortions in radar imagery, cont.

This lecture, we finalize our consideration of distortions that occur in radar image data. Let's start by looking at the material we have covered on geometric distortions in radar images Seetha. We can in fact make some general observations that our value in choosing look or incidence angles suited to particular purposes. First, for low-relief regions, larger look angles will emphasize topographic features through shadowing, making interpretation easier, for regions of high relief, larger look angles will minimize layover and release distortion, but will exaggerate shadowing. Relief distortion is worse for smaller look angles, low look angle missions such as Seasat designed, for oceanographic applications often produced distorted imagery of high relief terrain. Recall the slide of ocean features in lecture 18, which compared Seasat at 20 degrees with SIR-B at 40 degrees. Finally, from spacecraft altitude, reasonable swath widths are obtained with mid range look angles, that is about 35-50 degrees. For those angles, there is generally a little layover and little shadowing. Look angles in this range are good would for surface roughness interpretation. With this slide, we introduce a new right at in-between concept. Not unreasonably, we have been concentrating on imagery that is representative of the earth's surface. That means in the across swath direction, we have been concentrating on converting slant range resolution into ground range pixels. But that gives rise to strange features, such as near range compressional distortion, as we have seen. Instead of producing images on the ground plane, we could keep them in slant range format, as seen on this diagram. In such a view, image has range coordinates measured along the slant direction, rather than along the ground. A simple way to envisage the slant range product is to project it out to the side of the platform as shown. The advantage of slant range imagery is that it doesn't suffer the near range compressional distortion encountered when the ground range form is used. That can be appreciated by looking at the series of full concentric rings in the figure. The distance between pairs of which represent the slant range for solution of the system. The dotted curves illustrate that relief distortion occurs in both forms of imagery. Let's now think about how we might correct geometric errors in radar imagery. There are two broad approaches to geometric error correction, depending on the level of topographic relief in the region being imaged. First, for low-relief regions, in which shadowing and relief displacement distortions are not considered significant, near range compressional distortion can be removed readily because we can model its effect. There will be remaining areas in geometry caused by the same factors we saw with optical imagery, platform attitude and altitude variations in earth rotation and so on. They are corrected by the same techniques, and we will look at some aspects of that approach on the next slide. For regions of high relief, we have to account for severe errors like relief displacement. If we had available a digital terrain map of the region, it is possible to use it to model relief distortion since we know the mechanisms which give rise to it. An artificial radar image of the region can be created from the DTM, with shading added through the adoption of a surface scattering curve. The actual image is then registered to the artificial image, and remember the pixels in the actual image are placed in their distorted positions. The relief distortion effects are then removed from the real registered image by reversing the DTM distortions. The pixels will then had been placed on their correct DTM positions. When we looked at geometric distortion with optical images, we use control points and mapping polynomials. We can do the same with radar images. However, because of the presence of speckle, it is often difficult to locate naturally occurring control points to the required degree of accuracy. As a result, artificial control points are often created prior to recording the image data, by deploying devices that will give recognizable returns in the received imagery. The positions of those devices are usually accurately known, through GPS fixing, for example, so that image correction is assisted. Those artificial control points can be passive or active. We will now look at both. Although flat plates facing the incoming radar beam could be used to provide abroad facet-like reflection. They have to be aligned very accurately to ensure the maximum radar cross section is available. They use as control points, therefore is limited. Instead, trihedral corner reflectors are used. Having three faces, they have a large range of angles around boresight over which their radar cross section is within 3dB of maximum. In this slide, we see the radar cross sections. First, for a square trihedral reflector, which has a 23 degree beam angle, and secondly, a triangular trihedral reflector, which has a 40 degree beam angle. Sometimes corner reflectors are deployed in set patterns so that they are more easily recognizable in the recorded radar image. Knowing the radar cross section of the reflector, it can also be used for radiometric calibration of an image. Rather than relying on passive reflectors for control points and the calibration, active radar calibrated is can be used. They are simple transponders in that they have a receiver and a transmitter. The incident radar energy on reception, is amplified by a given amount and then re-transmitted. As a result, the return signal can be much larger than that from a passive corner reflector. One small problem with an active transponder, which in radar remote sensing is called an active radar calibrator or ARC, is that the inbuilt electronics will introduce a small time delay into the reflection. That means the calibrator will appear at a larger range in an image than it really is. That is handled by making up the time delay to a known amount, which thus gives a known range shift in the image, but which is easily corrected by subtraction. A variation on the ARC is to have different polarizations for the receiver and transmitter antennas, so that cross polarized imagery can be calibrated. They are then called PARCs or polarized active radar calibrators. Summarizing this lecture, we note first that shadowing in radar imagery is a problem in regions of high relief, the choice of incidence angle is significant in reducing shadowing, minimizing terrain distortion, and highlighting sea surface features. Mid-range look angles are good for land surface remote sensing. Small look angles are good for sea surface applications. Radar images can be presented in ground range or slant range format. Control Points for rectification of radar imagery can be synthesized using passive radar reflectors, such as trihedral corner reflectors. Finally, active radar calibrators can also be used for control points, and are also good for accurate radiometric calibration. That's the second question here, remind you about our treatment of the cardinal effect. 


> ## Quiz
>
> 1. ?
>
> > ## Solution
> >
> > 1. 
>    {: .solution}
 {: .challenge}

{% include links.md %}
