---
title: Module 3 Lecture 23 - Some other considerations in radar remote sensing
teaching: 
exercises: 
questions:
- "???"
objectives:
- "= = ="
keypoints:
- "- - -"
---

### Module 3 Lecture 23: Some other considerations in radar remote sensing

Now, look at some other imaging modalities with radar imaging, expanding our understanding of the possibilities of this wonderful imaging technology. The form of radar imaging we have been looking at so far, is referred to as strip mode, because it produces a continuous strip of imagery, as with optical remote sensing platforms. Other image types are all sat possible, three of which are illustrated in these next three slides. Sometimes, the swath widths generated in strip mode are not wide enough for some applications. The ScanSAR mode, provides a wider swath, by breaking the imaging into cells in the across track and the along track directions. The antenna, used is steered electronically over the cells as shown in the diagram. Each cell, is treated as a mini swath, in terms of the signal processing carried out to form an image, composite swaths of several 100 kilometers, then become possible. The processing needed to produce a ScanSAR image, is more complex than with conventional SAR, because of the need to join the scanned cells, but that is manageable. If the antenna beam, does not look directly to broadside, but for example, looks forward, the system is said to have squint. That can happen if the platform yaws, in which case, it is unintentional or it can be the result of a planned maneuver. It leads to coupling of the range, and azimuth dimensions of the image and to geometric distortion. If the antenna is squinted forward and then steered backwards as it passes, and continues to irradiate a target, as seen in the left-hand diagram. Then, higher resolution of that target region is possible, at the expense of resolution over the rest of the domain, this is called spotlight imaging. The image of, Sydney, shown on the right hand of the slide, is a great example of spotlight imaging. In which exceptionally good spatial resolution is achieved. We will see that in the next slide, in which the region around the bridge is expanded. The image was recorded by TerraSAR-X and created by averaging three high resolution spotlight images. The images were recorded on descending parsers, and the look direction was from the East, which is the right, in the image. Here, we see the former image zoomed in to the vicinity of the Sydney Harbour Bridge. Although, there are three images of the bridge, and is that unusual, one of them is highly detailed. The form of construction is easily seen, highlighting the exceptionally good spatial resolution, achieved with the spotlight mode. Take note of the other comments on the slide, concerning the features of the bridge and the image. We now need to say something about the types of radar image products available. For those of you with an engineering, or physics background, this should be straightforward. Radar image providers, make data available in a range of formats. Some tailored to particular applications, apart from interferometric and the tomographic products we will see later. Most will be derivatives of two fundamental formats, single look complex format and scattering coefficient format. Remember, that radar antennas radiate and receive electric fields, even though we often discuss the overall radar operation in terms of power and power density. If the amplitude and phase angle of the received field is recorded, that is called a complex signal. It is also a single look, in the sense that multi-look processing, to reduce speckle is carried out after reception. Taking these two properties together, the data as recorded will be single look complex. Mathematically, after it has been processed to extract the ranging pulse data from the underlying carrier frequency, the received signal can be described by the equation shown. When providing the single look complex data to the user, the radar operator, converts the received field into the complex elements of the scattering matrix, shown here. In which the operating polarization, is indicated by subscripts, as we saw earlier. Most often, the user will acquire scattering coefficient imagery, from the operator. Single look complex data, is modified in two ways to produce that form. First, the field amplitude is squared to produce intensity, which is directly related to received power. Secondly, look averaging is performed to reduce speckle and to produce a resolution cell that is roughly square in shape. In the single look complex product, the resolution cells will often be highly rectangular in the anticipation of square cells resulting from look summing. Again, in a multi polarization radar, a matrix of scattering coefficients can be provided as shown. Here, we see a variant of the traditional remote sensing imaging radar. It is not strictly necessary to have the transmitter and receiver at the same location as we have done up to now. Instead, we could put them at different positions and on different platforms. Such an arrangement is called bistatic SAR, as against the monostatic SAR configuration that we have been using so far. Clearly, there must be some form of communication between the transmitter and receiver so that the ranging pulse delay from transmission to reception can be computed. But that is only a matter of a telecommunications link. The transmitter could be on a space platform and the receiver on an aircraft. Also, the system can use what we call transmitters of opportunity, such as the signals from navigation satellites, which also reflect from earth surface features. Interestingly, note that the sun is an energy source of opportunity, in optical remote sensing. Although the analysis is more complicated, shadowing effects are different for bistatic SAR, and Earth's surface features behave differently because just their backscatter is no longer important, scattering at angles different from incidence angle, then become important. We can generalize the bistatic concept, it is possible to envisage a system with many transmitters and receivers. Variously called multistatic or network radars, their contemplated use is more common in surveillance applications than remote sensing, but with the trend towards clusters of small satellites for remote sensing applications, simple multistatic constellations are readily envisaged. Note that each receiver in such a configuration receives scattered signals from the target as a result of every transmitter. We now come to the next generalization of the operation of imaging radar. Standard synthetic aperture radar generates images of the landscape in the two horizontal spatial dimensions with detail in elevation projected onto the two-dimensional plane. In that respect, it is similar to optical imaging. InSAR, using two radars deployed across end or along track, takes the next step and enables the mapping of topographic relief and changes in relief with time, but it does not permit discrimination of detail vertically, such as the internal structure of a forest. By appropriately utilizing several radars, usually with vertical separation, for example, as passes of the same platform on different orbits, it is possible to identify vertical structure with the technique known as SAR tomography, or sometimes TomoSAR. Tomography resolves vertical detail by employing a synthesized vertical aperture much as azimuthal detail is resolved using aperture synthesis in normal SAR. This slide shows a recent example of TomoSAR, which illustrates the vertical resolution of forest detail. Five radar acquisitions recorded by the German Aerospace F-SAR system on 10th of June 2014, were used to derive the tomographic information. The F-SAR system is fully polarmetric, but was operated at L band for this experiment. It can also operate at X, C, S, and P bands. The top left-hand picture shows a radar image. A white transect indicates where forest vertical detail will be mapped, the bottom left-hand picture is a radar map of the canopy top or ground as appropriate. The canopy top information along the transit is seen on the very bottom right-hand picture, that allows a comparison with the canopy vertical or tomographic detail shown in the top right-hand picture. We have now completed our coverage of radar remote sensing. By way of summary of this last lecture, note that widespread widths can be achieved using the ScanSAR mode. The spotlight mode allows higher than usual resolution to be obtained over selected target regions. Bistatic radars use two platforms for imaging. Multistatic radar involves several transmitting and receiving antennas, each receiver can detect signals that result from scattering from each transmitter. Vertical detail can be resolved within a volumetric or compound scatterer using tomographic SAR, and TomoSAR uses a baseline orthogonal to the direction of propagation. The second question here is particularly important, it involves a scattering situation often encountered in radar imaging when multiple bounces of the incident radiation can occur before it is returned to the receiver.

> ## Quiz
>
> 1. ?
>
> > ## Solution
> >
> > 1. 
>    {: .solution}
 {: .challenge}

{% include links.md %}
